+++
title = "Expertise Areas"
date = '2026-06-20T09:00:00+02:00'
draft = false
+++

## Technology and Realization
Making has always been at the core of how I approach design. I already had a firm understanding of 3D printing after my bachelor, during my master's I got to deepen this. Aqua-Morph explored use of various flexible TPU filaments combined with hydrogel through a Material-Driven Design (MDD) lens.
During my M12 Greebling, I experimented with textured pressure sensing prints made from foamed TPU. My M21 Sonable used accessible 95A TPU to create compliant mechanisms, and my FMP Tabula again used foamed TPU as well as trialing Polypropylene for creating deformable interfaces.
All this combined experience grants me knowledge not just about the best settings for consistent fabrication quality. Interacting with so many different samples over the years gave me good insights in what type of interactive qualities they might give to a user (U&S). Each material has their own unique feel, that might be best suited for different inherent haptic qualities needed for a particular design.  
Beyond trying different materials for haptics, I also experimented to apply 3D-printing in more unconventional and creative ways. One of my pursuits during the masters was to embed conductive materials into 3D-prints to create circuits and actuators. Some of these experiments failed, but others have turned out succesfully. During my FMP Tabula I was able to fabricate double sided PCBs designed in KiCad, ultimately enabling more complicated circuit design and more sensors.

## Creativity and Aesthetics
Besides T&R, this is my other main expertise area, but they are not separate at all, but rather deeply intertwined. As to some people, 3D printing is a fabrication method that imposes limits on their designs. I tend to look for design opportunities, how could this technology be used to create a unique aesthetic. I often hear people that tend to pass off printed designs as prototypes, or even as toys. This is a stigma I want to break through offering functionally and aesthetically unique designs though filament printing.
The course Interactive Materiality was also a core learning experience of looking more closely at material qualities and how they can inspire interaction modalities and haptics.  
Besides materials and the tacit, I cannot help but mention sound. My fascination with sound design didn't come from nowhere. I've played instruments since I was a teenager. Only recently did I get into producing electronic music and what stood out to me was the immense sound design possibilities. Different synthesizers, sampling and editing methods can produce sounds that I could never fathom of playing. Through the course The Sound of Smart Things I got to apply sound design to design and interactions. Sound is an important omnipresent sensory channel as it can evoke so many different emontions in a user.  
Through my studies I got to partake in different projects that applied the MDD method. Aqua-Morph M11, CDR, and UME, were all courses and projects where I got to apply the method. Particularly applying Aqua-Morph led to me gaining a deep understanding of the different parameters that change material properties of printed TPU. This ultimately led to my continued expansive use of it and the foamed version during my M12, M21 and FMP.

## Math, Data and Computing
My foundation in MDC was already very strong coming from the bachelor. During the bachelor, my main focus was on software development for desktop computers using Java, Processing, Python and Jupyter. During the master I shifted my focus to microcontroller projects, as I felt like this more closely aligned with my vision. I wanted to create controllers for music, which need to be resposinsive. Slow response would inevitably lead to a bad user experience. Having convoluted software running in multiple stages on an Arduino communicating with a slow Python script did not suit this vision.  
In my M12 Greebling really got into the Pico-SDK for the RP2040 microcontroller, learning to program it in C. This made sure the device would be running as fast as possible. I also did a deepdive into the MIDI protocol to be able to connect the device with digital audio workstations (DAWs) such as Ableton.
For my M21 Sonable I used a sensor that required more high-level abstractions to keep the code readable, requiring me to learn C++ for embedded object oriented programming. During Sonable I developed and SPI library implementation for the MLX90395 3D hall-effect sensor, so I could seamlessly interface with multiple sensors at the same time, while running them at full speed.
Becoming proficient in these languages is a highly valuable skill in order to be able to iterate quickly through multiple design concepts (T&R, C&A). In my experience, LLMs do not do well with these less documented code applications, so I do not use them for these types of projects as they only slow me down.
Or order to expand my creative toolbox outside of embedded devices, I followed the course DUIET, where I turned my bass guitar into a MIDI controller using ArUco markers.

## User and Society
I feel like a grew a lot in this expertise area compared to last semester. Although I already applied the MDD method to a multiple projects, the insights generated here is only relevant to designers.  
During the bachelor the role of the technician was always bestowed upon me, rarely allowing me to partake much in the conducting of user tests.
For my FMP I conducted a co-design process, which through multiple design iterations, ultimately led to my final design Tabula. It was a really valuable experience for me to work with musicians who are non-designers.
Reflecting from a first-person perspective, I found my internal sense of the musican and the design are actually intertwined a lot of the time. Seeing how expert musicians react to my designs made me reconsider that internal sense, and reminded me to be careful about assuming what is intuitive and what is not.  
Conducting thematic analysis on this design process allowed me to formulate concrete insights about what made my designs valuable and to help create a definition of *expressivity* in deformable DMI design and frame it around existing HCI research. This also makes it easier to explain my project's importance to a wider audience, not just academics and designers.  
Ultimately, I feel like Tabula is somethign I can be really proud of, as it clearly fills a gap that is present in deformable DMI works. What started as a creative vision over a year ago, has now finally turned into something of which I can state how it can make an impact to design at large.

## Business and Entrepreneurship
My main expertise area aspire very much to realizing creative imagination. A design can be insightful for finding out new things, but not be producable at a large scale. I was asked by multiple musicians in my personal network if they could buy a copy of the tabula device from me. Currently Tabula is not fit for sale, it is a design research artifact. 
Although I am confident that I am more than capable to create a design suitable for production, I would say this is far from profitable (monetariliy speaking). 
Bringing my design to a slightly larger audience could do several things though. 
It can spread the interest into deformable interfaces.
I do not see the HiFi production of deformable DMIs as a main occupation, but rather a passion project to show my skills. More importantly it could show off my fabrication capabilities and design creativity (T&R, CDR, C&A) for potential employers.
A prime way of doing this is through using the deformable DMIs in my own compositions and live performances. There's also several synthesizer events throughout europe where I could show off my work, for example Dutch Modular Fest in august.